So, we have seen how the use of a clever data
structure, the union find data structure can
make Kruskal's algorithm more efficient.
The other two algorithms which we need to
make efficient or Dijkstra's algorithm for
the single source shortest path, and Prim's
algorithm for the minimum cost spanning tree.
Both of them it turns out require a data structure
that is usually called a priority queue.
So, to understand priority queues, let us
look at the following scenario.
So, supposing we would have a job scheduler
running on as operating system.
So, when we run multiple tasks on an operating
system each of them runs for a little bit
of time, and then is opt out.
So, job scheduler maintains a list of all
jobs which are pending along with their priorities.
Whenever the processor is free, the scheduler
picks out a job with a maximum priority in
the list and schedules it.
Now what happens?
Of course is this dynamic.
So, while some jobs are running, other new
jobs may arrive.
So, each time when new jobs arrive they will
come with different priorities, and this is
the job of the scheduler to make sure that
the new jobs with higher priority come ahead
of older job with lower priority.
So, from a data structure point of view, our
question is what is the best way for the scheduler
to maintain the list of pending jobs with
their priorities?
So, that this list can be updated dynamically
as this list gets updated, as new jobs arrive
from.
So, this is what we call a priority queue.
So, we have two basic operations in a priority
queue; the first is to extract the next job
which in this case means take the job with
the highest priority, and remove it from the
queue.
Now of course, we have the situation where
you have multiple jobs in the same priority.
So, we do not assume the priorities are unique,
but if they are not, unique then we can assume
either the there is some tie-breaking rule
or we do not care which one of the highest
priority jobs we get right.
So, the main operation is delete max; delete
the maximum priority item from the queue.
And then there is an insert.
So, a job will come it will be inserted, it
will come with a priority.
So, we need to insert into the list.
So, that subsequent delete max take this one
in to account.
So, the first solution that one could think
of to keep such a data is to maintain a list,
some kind of a linear structure and array
or a list, since it is growing dynamically
a list is your obvious choice.
Now if we keep an unsorted list, then it is
easy to add a job, which is up to appended
to the list.
So, insertion is a constant time operation
takes time O1), but as we have seen many times
if we have an unsorted list, then we have
to scan the entire list to find the minimum
or the maximum.
So, in this case if we want to do a delete
max from an unsorted list, this operation
is going to take as linear time proportional
to the size of the list or the number of jobs
that are pending at the moment.
So, the only useful thing one can do with
the list, otherwise is to should sort it.
So, if we sorted we can try and maintain jobs
in decreasing order of priority, if we do
it decreasing order of priority, then the
maximum priority job is always at the beginning
of the list.
So, we can instantly find it in constant time.
So, delete max now becomes a constant time
operation, then what happens to insert?
We need to insert a value in to the list,
and as we saw in insertion sort when we insert
a value in to the sorted list we have to walk
down the list to find the correct place to
put it in.
So, that will now take order N time.
So, between an unsorted list and in a sorted
list, we have a trade off in an unsorted list
delete max takes linear time, in a sorted
list insert takes linear time.
So, one all the other is a bottle neck.
So, whether we use an unsorted list or a sorted
list over a sequence of N jobs, supposing
N jobs arrive in the system will be process
them.
Then we will be inserting them N times and
deleting max N times.
So, which ever solution we use among these
two, we will end up spending order N square
time.
So, this suggest to us that a linear structure.
One dimensional structure has a severe limitation
with respect to solving the representation
of the priority queue in an efficient way.
So, we have to go from a one dimensional structure
to a two dimensional structure.
So, let us start with a very naive two dimensional
structure, just to show how we can get drastic
improvements, just I moving from one dimension,
two dimensions.
So, here we assume that we know an advance
somehow a bound in a number of total jobs
we can have.
So, we have assumed in this case say that
N is 25.
So, now what we do is instead of maintaining
a one dimensional list of length 25 - maximum
length 25, we reorganize this list as a square
array of 5 by 5.
So, square root N by square root n.
So, now you can see here an example of such
a thing.
So, we have 25 minus 6 19 jobs currently with
different priorities in there.
Sometimes two jobs may have the same priority
that does not matter.
But the important thing is that we are not
necessarily maintaining it in a kind of sequential
way through this two dimensional array, all
we are guarantying is that every row as we
look at the row from left to right is an ascending
order.
So, we have the first row is an ascending
order, second row in, but the rows themselves
have nothing in common with each other.
So, you could have bigger values in the second
row in the smaller row and vice versa.
So, for example, 19 is bigger than 12, then
the 17 is bigger than 8 and so on.
So, these are kind of five independent list
of jobs, which together makeup the total set
of jobs at each list is sorted.
So, now suppose you want to insert a new job
in to this list.
So, strategy is very simple we want to insert
it in the correct place in the first row that
has free space.
Now to find out if one of the rows has free
space, we need to walk down this thing to
find out how any elements are there.
So, you will save that work by keeping this
extra information here, which is the size
of each of the rows.
So, let us assume that we have the size available
of insert the rows, now we row in this particular
case that each row is a size five at most.
So, if the size is 5, when we know that if
it try to insert 11 into this first row, the
11 will not be able to fit there, because
there is no space basically.
So, then we move to the next row, once again
we see that the size is 5.
So, then we go to the third.
Now we see that there is a space, because
there are only three elements in this row
and it can take 5.
So, now we walk down this list and find the
correct place to insert it, and insert it
as we doing insertion sort.
So, another question is how much time this
is take.
Well, we know that it we have square root
of N rows.
So, it take square root of N steps to find
the correct row to insert going from top to
bottom, and then we have in each rows square
root of N entries.
So, if we do a usual insertion it takes time
proportional to the length of the row, we
are inserting into.
So, we have a square root of N scan to find
the correct row, the square root of N scan
to find the correct position within that row.
So, overall it is time O order of square root
of n.
So, what about deleting?
So, we want to delete the maximum element
in this array.
Now because each row is independent of other
row, we do not know in advance where this
maximum element is.
However, we do know that in every row the
maximum element is at the end, because each
row is sorted.
So, the first thing we do know is that every
possible maximum element is actually at the
end of its row.
So, we have these five rows, we have five
maximum elements.
And now the overall maximum must be among
these five elements, it must be the largest
one.
So, we can just use the size information.
So, we know it is the fifth element in the
first row, the fifth element in the second
row, the fourth element in the third and fourth
row, and the second element the last row.
So, using the size information, we can scan
through all of these and identify which is
the biggest one in this case it is 43, to
be identify the 43 needs to be deleted.
And then having deleted 43 then we remove
it, and then of course we have to also reduce
the size back from 4 to 3.
So, we can keep track of the size as and when
we manipulate in the previous example also
when we had increased 11, we made this 3 into
4.
So, again it is an order root N operation.
So, we have now achieved a data structure,
which keeps track of elements in a priority
queue where insert takes order root N time,
delete max takes order root N time, and therefore,
now processing a sequence of N jobs takes
N root N time.
Remember that previously it was order N square.
So, we have reduce from order N square to
order N 3 by 2, if you want to write it this
way So, this is just a sampler to explain
that a two dimensional structure can give
you significant savings over a linear structure.
So, of course we are not going to be happy
with this, others you would have just stop
with this.
So, we can actually do much better than N
to 3 by 2, and this is what we are going to
discuss in a later lecture.
To give you a preview, what we are going to
do is to maintain it not in a simple array
or a square matrix like this, but in a special
kind of binary tree called a heap.
So, this will be a binary tree.
So, it will have structure like this, and
it will be balanced.
So, basically all the paths will roughly have
the same length, and what this will mean is
that the height of the tree will be logarithmic
in the size of the tree.
And this will make both insert and delete
max take log N operations, and this will given
overall bound for N operations of N log N.
The other thing is that we actually maintain
it as a dynamic tree like this, we do not
have to make an assumption as we did not or
simple solution that we just proposed, where
we upper bound N.
We can have a solution where the tree can
grow as large as we want.
So, long as we make sure that we grow it in
a systematic way to keep it balanced.
So, this is what we will look at next, we
will look at this data structure called a
heap which implements a priority queue by
maintaining a set type of binary tree.